---
title: Attending _The Mind of the Artist_ Conference
---

Date 13 : 1 ++ 0 ++ 2 ++ 6

My partner Jules and I had the occasion this past weekend to attend a short conference on the subject of Psychoanalysis and Art, _The Mind of the Artist_, put on by the *New York Psychoanalytic Society*. The event spanned Friday night and most of the subsequent Saturday, consisting of two panel discussions, a plenary talk, and a Q&A session with the guests. What drew me to the event, aside from the subject matter, were the two guests with which I was most familiar: Mark Solms and Eric Kandel. The latter, no doubt, is a ubiquitous name at the level of contemporary science itself. In keeping with his irreproachable credentials and celebrity status, Kandel was the only guest granted the full floor for a talk, while the other participants engaged in the panel discussions, achieving a commendable level of discursive energy punctuated by short conflictual gems.

I think the above description should more than suffice to set the scene, aside from a plethora of additional details that should hardly evaluate far beyond the threshold of meaninglessness. And tempting as it might be, for someone who I am not, to descend into the grotesque kitsch of a gonzo account of a short psychoanalysis conference, nay _eventlet_, I will leave the inventory of context with only a few more summary details of the experience before giving the full floor to the substantial content. Specifically, the room in which the entire program ran its course was windowless and the coffee, which was in short supply, nonetheless managed to give me the shakes inversely proportional to the scarce fraction I managed to obtain and consume.

Setting all of this aside, it is worth going into some detail about the two guest I was particularly excited to see on the program and how their mere presence at the event determined something about its direction. Although the explicit theme of the conference was the exploration of and discussion about the mind of the artist, from the perspective of psychoanalysis, the leitmotif that was ever present among the lines of flight traversed in the discussions was the relationship between science and the arts from the perspective of the practicing subject. Psychoanalysis thereby became suspended along this arc as a potential mediator between these compared and contrasted subjectivities. A much shorter path could have connected psychoanalysis to art, which would have taken the discussion as the crow flies without the obstructing presence of something more complicated that would force matters to discover the very detours that lie at the thematic soul of psychoanalytic imagery.

The formidable counterweight on the side of science took the form of Eric Kandel, who is foremost a Neuroscientist, awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine for his work on the biology of memory, along with every other prize imaginable. Moreover, Kandel is the editor of *Principles of Neuroscience*, perhaps the canonical modern text on the subject. To boot, Kandel is unfathomably old. By itself, this description would seem to situate Kandel at odds with the field of psychoanalysis, given psychoanalysis has been so readily dismissed and disavowed in what one might call the _harder_ more _objective_ sectors of the academy. Freud and his legacy have been relegated at most American universities to the film and comp lit departments as a mere interpretive lens to be kept by restraining order no fewer than 500 feet from the clinical psychology department, let alone any life sciences laboratory.

And yet Kandel goes against this grain of disregard or outright disdain for psychoanalysis, turning out to be one of its great defenders within the sciences. In [link] a 1999 article published in _The American Journal of Psychiatry_ [ref], Kandel makes the case for using neuroscience to breathe new life into psychoanalysis, reestablishing its relevance as an important theoretical framework for understanding the psyche. Kandel makes the striking statement in the introduction:

> psychoanalysis still represents the most coherent and intellectually satisfying view of the mind

That someone with Kandel's perspective would divulge such a conviction in the psychoanalytic picture of the mind must, at the least, provide some suggestion that the arguments of psychoanalysis are worthy of consideration. 

Regardless of how high the achievements are of someone who champions an idea that is fully capable of submitting itself to rational investigation, the constituting arguments must stand on their own as inherently convincing; authority is certainly a poor surrogate for reason. Nevertheless, given the frustrating finitude of time and resources (footnote: and my graduate advisor would argue that the former is in fact not subsumed by the later) we cannot help but take it as a guidepost when someone who knows what the fuck they are doing has given an idea a positive review. To this end, I, myself, have used Kandel in defense of psychoanalysis at times when I felt as though it might at least get me in the door so that I can commence my high-pressure sales pitch for the mental model of Freud that has seemed so powerfully convincing to me.

Given Kandel's interest, not only in psychoanalysis by itself, but more, in connecting it with neuroscience, it comes as no great surprise that the Godfather of neuroscience was invited to give a talk at an event pitched more in the direction of psychoanalysts and their more humanist compatriots. Most of the rest of the guests were impressively accomplished in the arts, philosophy, theory, and literature alongside their psychoanalytic engagements. Nonetheless, the other working scientist among the group was none other than [link] Mark Solms, the boss of Neuropsychoanalysis; the field that studies precisely what Kandel encouraged in his 1999 article. Solms is consequently a model interdisciplinarian, having a foot firmly planted in both neuroscience and psychoanalysis.

While the two guests straddling the divide between psychoanalysis and modern science stood out in their efforts to mend the disciplinary chasms of academia, every one of the guests, and probably a lot of the attendees, were testaments to how intellectually cosmopolitan psychoanalysis is as a field. Reading Freud's work, one finds that amid Freud's focus on answering questions about the mind a plethora of references to literature, history, philosophy, poetry, art, mythology, archaeology, religion, and the sciences. Freud thusly set an enduring imperative to pursue erudition in understanding the human mind that sits in the center of the collective output of human intelligence.

The importance of the humanities in psychoanalysis is twofold. In its practice, understanding the structure of an analysand's psyche demands that the analyst have a broad grasp of the collection of cultural, linguistic, and historical influences that shape it, let alone provide the practical basis for a discourse around it. For this reason, Freud recommended that psychoanalysts read everything, steeping themselves in worldliness. On the other hand, in its theoretical investigations, for psychoanalysis to effectively interrogate the subject, it must saturate itself with the most vivid creations and expressions of subjectivity. In some respects, the artist 

One could go further, perhaps, adding that the arts and humanities serve as an essential supply of concepts and metaphors one must avail themselves to in confronting the frontiers of any challenging intellectual inquiry. And while what we regard today as the proper sciences possess a surplus of technical language and conceptual models, the specificity of these theoretical tools makes it more difficult to pour them into a different mold. Ideas from the arts, less tightly coupled to empirical demands of universal coherence among observations, can consequently be more freely be explored as the clay that may give rise under inspired hands to form a more powerful figuration of what may be one of the most challenging subjects to abstract. Moreover, Lacan's work, along with that of other Postmodernists, has managed to invite a surprising degree of censure, even contempt, from scientists when attempting to borrow mathematical ideas to fashion any kind of a calculus around the psychoanalytic subject; art and the humanities seem to invite more inspiration, at the least.

On the other side, the role of natural science in psychoanalysis has been grounded in a more tumultuous relationship of progress between the latter field and the former collection of fields. The sciences share a methodological orthodoxy forged in centuries of successes leading up to crowning theoretical achievements in physics and chemistry, as well as key discoveries in biology, by the end of the 19th. Developing models of objective phenomena under the rigid criteria that they are not only demonstrable and justified, but measurable and testable via measurement in a manner that appeals to an increasingly regular statistical treatment, excludes the possibility of seriously entertaining any conceptual or qualitative model as anything more that provisional, even unmentionable. Freud was well aware in transitioning from his investigations of the functioning of nerve cells as an early neuroscientist to his investigation of the psychical experience of human subjects that he was moving into a territory where understanding could hardly be achieved through measuring quantities and proposing formulaic relationships, let alone experimentations that offered the same reproducibility as those in physics and chemistry.

I can only hope Freud had the foresight to proactively avoid the quantitizing contrivances littered throughout modern psychology when was confronting the mysteries of hysteria. One can only imagine what a more systematically quantitative scientist might have done in his place; creating a 10 point scale for various neurotic symptoms, measuring the velocity of arm-flapping, fainting frequency, the torque endured in catatonic arms about the elbow, the angle of asymmetry observed in a dragged foot, or the degree of freely associative lability as determined by the number of substantial utterances yielded within a standardized 5 minute period. Freud was certainly well aware that he did not possess the tools in his time to conduct a serious material inquiry into his conceptual models. Instead, psychoanalysis was pursued as a science in the much looser sense of the term: an effort to construct any rational model that accounts for what is observed, judged by how compellingly it consolidates these observations and provides predictions for further ones. This must be what Kandel had in mind when he called psychoanalysis "the most coherent and intellectually satisfying view of the mind". That is to say that psychoanalysis, I would argue with Kandel on my side (among others), makes a tremendously compelling argument that appeals to the aesthetics of reason and rhetoric.

With this in mind, what psychoanalysis did not admit in Freud's time was a particular kind of justification, a scientific proof, born out of a mathematically demonstrable coherence of numerical measurement. Today, with regards to all natural phenomena, this specific kind of scientific justification is held widely as the gold standard for judging any model. What Kandel argues in this paper, is that we have only recently developed the scientific tools in the fields of neuroscience and medical imaging to provide the basis for forming scientific judgements of Freud's ideas. Freud's model of the mind can only now begin to be weighed upon the balance of modern scientific judgment by way of the neurobiological correlates that manifest this model in measurable matter. And this is precisely the pursuit that Solms has vigorously lead in the new field of Neuropsychoanalysis.

With all of this in mind as context, the premise of this conference, with Kandel and Solms as two of the key guests, was quite remarkable. Two key figures responsible for bringing the fields of psychoanalysis and neuroscience together came to talk about _the mind of the artist_. One would have guessed, in contrast, that those from the scientific end of the spectrum of fields peripherally engaged with psychoanalysis would not have even been given the floor in a conference centered on the theme of psychoanalysis and art, especially because one could so easily imagine in today's academic environment, psychoanalysis and art happily walking hand in hand away from the sciences that have, in the modern era, treated both disciplines so coldly and judgmentally.

To me, just the premise of this conference was, by itself, certainly a sign that new interdisciplinary possibilities had gained significant ground around psychoanalysis. A point Zizek has brought up often in the political sphere is how history does not only divide and consolidate its parties, but in its most formative moments, it creates new divisions that cut across old categories. I believe this is true as well among academic disciplines and their apparent affiliations. The possibility exists for interdisciplinary efforts, not only to bring together, but more, to cut across the intellectual divisions that have become so familiar: the sciences, the social sciences, the humanities, the arts, etc ... not to mention engineering. I believe Freud would have like to place psychoanalysis in _the sciences_ with sanguine affiliations to all of the latter groups, but at any American University, one would get the impression that it is quarantined within the humanities, while its distant cousin _psychology_ proper sits between the social and natural sciences, and its great uncle _psychiatry_, has tenure firmly established in the latter, irrespective of changes in fashion and reputation. Yet, this conference offered a glimpse of a confederation of work and ideas that cuts across these categories, merging some of their adherents, while likely collectively alienating others across these disciplines.

To speculate a little wildly myself, and I by no means intend to cast this as clairvoyance, I could imagine an alliance like Neuropsychoanalysis, dividing psychoanalysis itself into the components that can engage productively with the sciences conceptually, and those that have clung variously to mysticism and metaphysical allusions; to put a name on it: Jung. Moreover, between the fields that concern themselves with the mind and brain, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, psychology, and psychiatry, while the first two have seemed to straddle the latter two in rigor and objective measurement, their enmeshment in the form of Neuropsychoanalysis may indeed obviate the other two. Psychology has, as of late, suffered from impressions that its rigor has been somewhat illusory and shallow, particularly suffering from a deficit of reproducibility, while psychiatry is often regarded today as consisting of mediaeval practices, fit for a B-horror film, and a rudderless and deranged psycho-pharmacological industry. Taking the systematic (albeit, not very quantitatively measurable) understanding of the subject that has come from psychoanalysis, a mind operating through the mechanics of condensation, displacement, repression, etc..., and connecting it to the very physiological, electrical, material understanding of the brain that has come from neuroscience, would seem to short-circuit the very chasm of mind-body Dualism that has cleaved apart the sciences and the humanities, consequently cutting through some middle-men that have proffered from inserting themselves into this gap.

I could conclude with the outrageous claim that, indeed, Neuropsychoanalysis may be the most promising point of reconciliation between the human study of the subjective and that of the objective. But instead, this new discipline could also turn out to be a fountainhead of further mysteries around this gap, leading us only asymptotically to such an understanding. In either case, I would certainly argue that Neuropsychoanalysis today offers a tantalizing possibility to walk along the fertile frontier of interdisciplinarity.






Bib
@article{kandel1999biology,
  title={Biology and the future of psychoanalysis: a new intellectual framework for psychiatry revisited},
  author={Kandel, Eric R},
  journal={American journal of Psychiatry},
  volume={156},
  number={4},
  pages={505--524},
  year={1999},
  publisher={Am Psychiatric Assoc},
  url={https://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1176/ajp.156.4.505}
}


